docs: add deployment concepts page. (#794)
electric-sql/electric: docs/deployment/concepts.md

---
title: Concepts
description: >-
  The ingredients of a successful ElectricSQL deployment.
sidebar_position: 5
---

# The ingredients of a successful deployment

Each ElectricSQL deployment has three main components: your Postgres database, the Electric sync service and your local-first app. The sync service also provides a migration proxy and the `electric-sql` client library provides a generator script and proxy tunnel.

[![Overview of deployment components](../deployment/_images/components.png)](../deployment/_images/components.jpg)

The following section describes these components and their requirements in turn. The next section then describes [how to connect them](#connections).

## Components

### Postgres

ElectricSQL works on top of a Postgres database. Postgres is the source of durability in the system. It's the source of the shared DDL schema and the DDLX rules.

> The requirements for Postgres are detailed on the [installation page](../usage/installation/postgres.md). You need logical replication enabled and a db user with sufficient privileges. This deployment section has a [list of compatible managed Postgres hosts](../top-level-listings/deployment.md#deployment-options).

Reviewer: > list of compatible managed Postgres hosts

This is misleading because that page has a list of deployment platforms, not all of which offer a managed Postgres.

ElectricSQL provides the [Electric sync service](../api/service.md). This is a web application that manages active-active replication between Postgres and your local app. The sync service is developed in [Elixir](https://elixir-lang.org). It can run anywhere you can deploy Elixir or Docker. It exposes at least a single HTTP port. This port provides both an HTTP API and a websocket API for the [Satellite replication protocol](../api/satellite.md).

The sync service also provides interfaces on two optional TCP ports:

1. the [logical publisher](#1-electric---postgres) for writing data into Postgres using logical replication
2. the [migrations proxy](#2-migrations---proxy) for applying DDL migrations

These are discussed in the [Connections](#connections) section below.

### App

Together, Postgres and Electric form the backend of your application, typically running in the cloud. The front-end of your application is a local app that you develop using the [`electric-sql` client library](../api/clients/typescript.md). This can be a [web app](../integrations/drivers/web/wa-sqlite.md) running in the browser, or a [mobile](../integrations/drivers/mobile/expo.md) or desktop app.

> Whatever your target environment, your app code typically needs to be built, bundled and deployed to a server. This usually involves generating the [type safe client](../usage/installation/client.md) as part of your build process, which requires connecting to the Electric sync service, as [discussed below](#3-generator---electric).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whatever your target environment, your app code typically needs to be built, bundled and deployed to a server to be served as static files. This usually involves generating the [type safe client](../usage/installation/client.md) as part of your build process, which requires connecting to the Electric sync service, as [discussed below](#3-generator---electric).
```

Maybe it's just me, but it was confusing to me to read about the front-end of the app being a local app, followed by a mention of it getting deployed to a server.

### Generator

> The generator is a CLI command built into the `electric-sql` Typescript library. It provides an `npx electric-sql generate` command that you call in development and during your build process to generate a [type safe client library](../usage/installation/client.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generator is built into the `electric-sql` Typescript library and is invoked as the `npx electric-sql generate` command that you call in development and during your build process to generate a [type safe client library](../usage/installation/client.md).
```

The generator needs to be able to connect to the Electric sync service and outputs a Typescript module that's imported and bundled into your app.

### Migrations proxy

The [migrations proxy](../usage/data-modelling/migrations.md#migrations-proxy) is a TCP service exposed by the Electric sync service. It supports the Postgres connection protocol and proxies interactive Postgres sessions applying migrations to your Postgres database.

> Some application hosting services do not support external TCP ports. In this case, you can [use a proxy tunnel](#use-a-proxy-tunnel) to connect to the migrations proxy via the Electric sync service HTTP port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some application hosting services do not support external TCP ports. In this case, you can [use a proxy tunnel](#22-using-a-proxy-tunnel) to connect to the migrations proxy via the Electric sync service HTTP port.
```

## Connections

Having introduced the components of an ElectricSQL deployment above, we now discuss how to connect them. There are four main connections:

1. [Electric <-> Postgres](#1-electric---postgres) &mdash; the Electric sync service needs to connect to Postgres
2. [Migrations <-> Proxy](#2-migrations---proxy) &mdash; your migrations tooling needs to connect to the Migrations proxy

> 3. [Generator <-> Electric](#3-generator---electric) &mdash; the Generator needs to connect to the Electric sync service

Reviewer: and to Postgres directly. This is a requirement as long as we're using Prisma for schema introspection.

Author: I was loathe to say this because surely we must change this -- Electric can talk to Postgres on the generator's behalf? But yes, this is currently true so needs to be said.

Author: Actually it's to the migrations proxy btw, not to Postgres. Which makes even less sense to me.

Reviewer: Right, I misspoke.

3. it writes changes to Postgres that it receives from clients over the [Satellite replication protocol](../api/satellite.md)

This last one, writes changes to Postgres, can be done in two ways:

- you can set `ELECTRIC_WRITE_TO_PG_MODE=direct_writes` to write data to Postgres using a normal interactive client connection
- you can set `ELECTRIC_WRITE_TO_PG_MODE=logical_replication` to stream data into Postgres using a logical replication publication

Direct writes mode works out of the box and is the easiest mode to configure, with no additional network connectivity required. Logical replication mode requires exposing a TCP host and port to Postgres, so that Postgres can establish a logical replication subscription. This can be configured using the `LOGICAL_PUBLISHER_HOST` and `LOGICAL_PUBLISHER_PORT` env vars.

See <DocPageLink path="api/service" /> for more information.

### 2. Migrations <-> Proxy

Your migrations tooling should apply DDL migrations to Postgres via the [Migrations proxy](../usage/data-modelling/migrations.md#migrations-proxy). The Migrations proxy speaks the Postgres protocol and is exposed by the Electric sync service.

There are two ways to connect to it:

> 1. [as a TCP service](#2-1-as-a-tcp-service)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [as a TCP service](#21-as-a-tcp-service)
```

> 2. [using a Proxy tunnel](#2-2-using-a-proxy-tunnel)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. [using a Proxy tunnel](#22-using-a-proxy-tunnel)
```

#### 2.1 As a TCP service

If you can expose a TCP port to your Electric instance, you can connect to the proxy over it.

[![Connecting to the migrations proxy over a TCP port](../deployment/_images/tcp-port.png)](../deployment/_images/tcp-port.jpg)

The port exposed is configured using the `PG_PROXY_PORT` environment variable. For example, if your Electric service is running on `example.com` with `PG_PROXY_PORT=65432`, then you can connect using:

```
postgresql://${user}:${password}@example.com:65432/electric
```

> Where `user` and `password` are the credentials to use to connect to your Postgres and `electric` is a default database name used for the proxy connection. When the connection is proxied onto your Postgres, Electric will use the host, port and dbname configured in the `DATABASE_URL` used to connect Electric to Postgres.

Reviewer: Technically speaking, `user` is used to choose the operation mode of the proxy and `password` must be the `PG_PROXY_PASSWORD`.

Author: > `user` is used to choose the operation mode of the proxy

@magnetised this is what I believe is undocumented at the moment.

Reviewer: Something went horrible wrong in the edited version of this paragraph. I've pushed a new commit to your branch to fix that.

:::note
Some migrations tooling requires special handling by the Migrations proxy. See the specific [backend integration docs](../integrations/backend/index.md) for more information.
:::

#### 2.2 Using a Proxy tunnel

If your application host doesn't support exposing multiple ports, or doesn't support exposing a TCP port to the public Internet (this is true of many hosting services optimised for running HTTP services) then you can use a Proxy tunnel to connect to the Migrations proxy over HTTP.

[![Connecting to the migrations proxy using a Proxy tunnel](../deployment/_images/proxy-tunnel.png)](../deployment/_images/proxy-tunnel.jpg)

This works by running a CLI command provided by the `electric-sql` library to expose a TCP port on your local network. You then connect your migrations tooling to this local service and it connects to Electric using a TCP-over-HTTP tunnel:

> For example to expose a tunnel to the Migrations proxy using the Electric sync service HTTP port, where the sync service is running on host `example.com`, port `5133`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to expose a tunnel to the Migrations proxy using the Electric sync service HTTP port, where the sync service is running on host `example.com`, port `5133`:
```
